THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019
ACT NO. 35 OF 2019
[9th August, 2019]

An Act to provide for protection of the interests of consumers and for the said purpose, to establish authorities for timely and effective administration and settlement of consumers' disputes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.—
(1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government, by notification, this Act shall apply to all goods and services.

2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "advertisement" means any audio or visual publicity, representation, endorsement or pronouncement made by means of light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic media, internet or website and includes through any notice, circular, label, wrapper, invoice or such other documents;
(2) "appropriate laboratory" means a laboratory or an organisation—
    (i) recognised by the Central Government; or
    (ii) recognised by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf; or
    (iii) established by or under any law for the time being in force, which is maintained, financed or aided by the Central Government or a State Government for carrying out analysis or test of any goods with a view to determining whether such goods suffer from any defect;

CHAPTER II
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS

3. Central Consumer Protection Council.—
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish the Central Consumer Protection Council to be known as the Central Council.
(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, namely:—
    (a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government, who shall be the Chairperson; and
    (b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER III
CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY

10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority.—
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Central Consumer Protection Authority to be known as the Central Authority to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade practices and false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce the rights of consumers as a class.
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of a Chief Commissioner and such number of other Commissioners as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government to exercise the powers and discharge the functions under this Act.
(3) The headquarters of the Central Authority shall be at such place in the National Capital Region of Delhi, and it shall have regional and other offices in any other place in India as the Central Government may decide.

CHAPTER IV
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION

28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—
(1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the District Commission, in each district of the State:
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one District Commission in a district.
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of—
    (a) a President; and
    (b) not less than two and not more than such number of members as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Central Government.

[Content truncated for brevity]