SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) vs Union Of India
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
Decided on: 24.08.2017

JUDGMENT

Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.

1. Nine judges of this Court assembled to determine whether privacy is a constitutionally protected value. The issue reaches out to the foundation of a constitutional culture based on the protection of human rights and enables this Court to revisit the basic principles on which our Constitution has been founded and their consequences for a way of life it seeks to protect. This case presents challenges for constitutional interpretation. If privacy is to be construed as a protected constitutional value, it would redefine in significant ways our concepts of liberty and the entitlements that flow out of its protection.

2. Privacy in its simplest sense allows each human being to be left alone in a core which is inviolable. Yet the autonomy of the individual is conditioned by her relationships with the rest of society. Those relationships may and do often pose questions to autonomy and free choice. The overarching presence of state and non-state entities regulates aspects of social existence which influence the freedom of the individual. The preservation of constitutional liberty is, so to speak, work in progress. Challenges have to be addressed to existing problems. Equally, new challenges have to be dealt with in terms of a constitutional understanding of where liberty places an individual in the context of a social order. The emergence of new challenges is exemplified by this case, where the debate on privacy is being analysed in the context of a global information based society. In an age where information technology governs virtually every aspect of our lives, the task before the Court is to impart constitutional meaning to individual liberty in an interconnected world. While we revisit the question whether our constitution protects privacy as an elemental principle, the Court has to be sensitive to the needs of and the opportunities and dangers posed to liberty in a digital world.

3. A Bench of three judges of this Court, while considering the constitutional challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union government noted in its order dated 11 August 2015 that the norms for and compilation of demographic biometric data by government was questioned on the ground that it violates the right to privacy. The Attorney General for India urged that the existence of a fundamental right of privacy is in doubt in view of two decisions : the first – M P Sharma v Satish Chandra, District Magistrate, Delhi (M P Sharma) was rendered by a Bench of eight judges and the second, in Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh (Kharak Singh) was rendered by a Bench of six judges. Each of these decisions, in the submission of the Attorney General, contained observations that the Indian Constitution does not specifically protect the right to privacy. On the other hand, the petitioners submit that M P Sharma and Kharak Singh were founded on principles expounded in A K Gopalan v State of Madras. Gopalan, which construed each provision contained in the Chapter on fundamental rights as embodying a distinct protection, was held not to be good law by an eleven-judge Bench in Rustom Cavasji Cooper v Union of India (Cooper). Hence the petitioners submitted that the basis of the two earlier decisions is not valid. Moreover, it was also urged that in the seven-judge Bench decision in Maneka Gandhi v Union of India, the minority view of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh was specifically approved of and the decision of the majority was overruled.

PART A
The Reference

4. While considering the constitutional challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union government, the learned Attorney General for India had submitted that the case be referred to a Constitution Bench since there is a substantial question of law as to whether there is a fundamental right to privacy under the Indian Constitution. The three-judge Bench of this Court before which the matter came up for hearing, took note of two decisions of this Court which had a bearing on the constitutional status of the right to privacy. The first of those decisions was rendered by a Bench of eight judges in M P Sharma and the second by a Bench of six judges in Kharak Singh.

[Content truncated for brevity]